Add CICD spans and resources (#2013)
open-telemetry/semantic-conventions: docs/cicd/cicd-spans.md

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: Spans
--->

# Semantic conventions for CICD spans

**Status**: [Development][DocumentStatus]

<!-- toc -->

- [CICD Spans](#cicd-spans)
  - [Pipeline run](#pipeline-run)
  - [Pipeline task run](#pipeline-task-run)

<!-- tocstop -->

## CICD Spans

The conventions described in this section are specific to Continuous Integration / Continuous Deployment (CICD) systems.

> **Disclaimer:** These are initial CICD spans and attributes

Reviewer: Maybe we don't need this disclaimer. I believe this is somewhat implicit by the document status.

Author: Removed in 41762ab10dc5eb134c55bd84bedab0dafd8ae9a3

but more may be added in the future.

> Also consider setting other attributes of the [CICD and VCS resource conventions][cicdres].

Reviewer: IMO If we think those are valuable on the spans here, we should add them here with proper requirement levels instead of being generic like this.

Author: Let's reword this to make the intent clearer.

We want to reference the relevant resource conventions to be used:
> Any resources of the [CICD and VCS resource conventions] that apply SHOULD be used.

Do we want to allow setting the attributes from the resources as span attributes as well (eg. if for technical reasons they cannot be set as resources)?
We could add the following:
> If resources cannot be used for technical reasons, the resource attributes MAY be set as span attributes.

[cicdres]: /docs/resource/cicd.md (CICD and VCS resource conventions)

### Pipeline run

<!-- semconv span.cicd.pipeline.run.server -->
<!-- NOTE: THIS TEXT IS AUTOGENERATED. DO NOT EDIT BY HAND. -->
<!-- see templates/registry/markdown/snippet.md.j2 -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<!-- markdownlint-capture -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable -->

| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | [Requirement Level](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/general/attribute-requirement-level/) | Stability |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|

> | [`cicd.pipeline.result`](/docs/attributes-registry/cicd.md) | string | The result of a pipeline run. | `success`; `failure`; `timeout`; `skipped` | `Required` | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |

Reviewer 2: I do not see `cancelation` and `error` described below

Author: It's described a few lines below: https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/bbce19df8fecc23c220c58ca8f73f9c80a73361a/docs/cicd/cicd-spans.md?plain=1#L43-L52

Do you mean that the description should be improved?

Reviewer 2: For some reason, I thought it was a complete list of values instead of a sample

Reviewer 3: Is it good as it is or should I improve the description?

The following attributes can be important for making sampling decisions
and SHOULD be provided **at span creation time** (if provided at all):

> * [`cicd.pipeline.result`](/docs/attributes-registry/cicd.md)

Reviewer 3: So that's what the `sampling_relevant` flag is for.
This is not right since the result can only be set at the end of the pipeline run.
→ review use of `sampling_relevant` flag.

Author: Fixed in bbce19df8fecc23c220c58ca8f73f9c80a73361a

---

`cicd.pipeline.result` has the following list of well-known values. If one of them applies, then the respective value MUST be used; otherwise, a custom value MAY be used.

| Value  | Description | Stability |
|---|---|---|
| `cancellation` | The pipeline run was cancelled, eg. by a user manually cancelling the pipeline run. | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |
| `error` | The pipeline run failed due to an error in the CICD system, eg. due to the worker being killed. | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |
| `failure` | The pipeline run did not finish successfully, eg. due to a compile error or a failing test. Such failures are usually detected by non-zero exit codes of the tools executed in the pipeline run. | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |

> | `skip` | The pipeline run was skipped, eg. due to a precondition not being met. | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |

Reviewer 2: `skip` or `skipped`

<!-- endsemconv -->

### Pipeline task run

<!-- semconv span.cicd.pipeline.task.server -->
<!-- NOTE: THIS TEXT IS AUTOGENERATED. DO NOT EDIT BY HAND. -->
<!-- see templates/registry/markdown/snippet.md.j2 -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<!-- markdownlint-capture -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable -->

| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | [Requirement Level](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/general/attribute-requirement-level/) | Stability |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| [`cicd.pipeline.task.name`](/docs/attributes-registry/cicd.md) | string | The human readable name of a task within a pipeline. Task here most closely aligns with a [computing process](https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Pipeline_(computing)) in a pipeline. Other terms for tasks include commands, steps, and procedures. | `Run GoLang Linter`; `Go Build`; `go-test`; `deploy_binary` | `Required` | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |
| [`cicd.pipeline.task.run.id`](/docs/attributes-registry/cicd.md) | string | The unique identifier of a task run within a pipeline. | `12097` | `Required` | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |

> | [`cicd.pipeline.task.run.result`](/docs/attributes-registry/cicd.md) | string | The result of a task run. | `success`; `failure`; `timeout`; `skipped` | `Required` | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |

Reviewer 2: `cancelation` and `error` are missing, and `required` is not described below

Author: These are just examples and not an exhaustive list.
A list of well-known values is shown a few lines below:
https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/bbce19df8fecc23c220c58ca8f73f9c80a73361a/docs/cicd/cicd-spans.md?plain=1#L84-L93

Is there a better way to point this list out?

and SHOULD be provided **at span creation time** (if provided at all):

* [`cicd.pipeline.task.name`](/docs/attributes-registry/cicd.md)
* [`cicd.pipeline.task.run.id`](/docs/attributes-registry/cicd.md)
* [`cicd.pipeline.task.run.result`](/docs/attributes-registry/cicd.md)
* [`cicd.pipeline.task.run.url.full`](/docs/attributes-registry/cicd.md)

---

`cicd.pipeline.task.run.result` has the following list of well-known values. If one of them applies, then the respective value MUST be used; otherwise, a custom value MAY be used.

| Value  | Description | Stability |
|---|---|---|
| `cancellation` | The task run was cancelled, eg. by a user manually cancelling the task run. | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |
| `error` | The task run failed due to an error in the CICD system, eg. due to the worker being killed. | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |
| `failure` | The task run did not finish successfully, eg. due to a compile error or a failing test. Such failures are usually detected by non-zero exit codes of the tools executed in the task run. | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |

> | `skip` | The task run was skipped, eg. due to a precondition not being met. | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |

Reviewer 2: `skip` or `skipped`

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: Spans
--->

# Semantic conventions for CICD spans

**Status**: [Development][DocumentStatus]

<!-- toc -->

- [CICD Spans](#cicd-spans)
  - [Pipeline run](#pipeline-run)
  - [Pipeline task run](#pipeline-task-run)

<!-- tocstop -->

## CICD Spans

The conventions described in this section are specific to Continuous Integration / Continuous Deployment (CICD) systems.

Any resources of the [CICD and VCS resource conventions][cicdres] that apply SHOULD be used.

[cicdres]: /docs/resource/cicd.md (CICD and VCS resource conventions)

### Pipeline run

For all pipeline runs, a span with kind `SERVER` SHOULD be created corresponding to the execution of the pipeline run.

The span name MUST follow the overall [guidelines for span names](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/v1.43.0/specification/trace/api.md#span).

> The span name SHOULD be `{action} {pipeline}` if there is a (low-cardinality) `pipeline` available.

Reviewer 4: I'm not entirely following this section when reading it in isolation. What is `{action}` and what is `{pipeline}` -- aka, where do those come from? 

Additionally, I don't immediately understand the point around low-cardinality in the names and why that matters. 

In my mind, if we made this the convention, then the `{action}` described below would require everyone to update their pipelines to support conventions? In the current pipeline, the span names map directly to the `cicd.pipeline.{run, task}.name`. This makes it easy to read in the visualizing backend, but also reference by attribute.

Thoughts on the path here?

Author: I was basing myself on `http-spans.md` to define the span name, hence splitting the name into action and object on which the action is performed.

As mentioned a few lines below `{pipeline}` is the same as the `cicd.pipeline.name` attribute.

The low-cardinality phrase also comes from `http-spans.md` where it refers to the span name usually being the http controller which is usually the URL path. The low cardinality there is to exclude path parameters from being included in the span name. The low-cardinality is required so meaningful statistics per span name can be calculated.

For cicd I can't think of any similar issue as with http path parameters, but I think it makes sense to keep the low-cardinality phrasing just in case.

In my opinion it's good to have `{action}` since different cicd systems might want to have different names for the action (eg. `SYNC` vs `BUILD`). Also the same CICD might have different actions for the same pipeline (eg. `BUILD` vs `UPDATE`).

In my opinion it makes sense to have the `{action} {pipeline}` definition for span names since this aligns with several conventions for span names (http, gen-ai, database, faas, messaging).

Reviewer 5: In Jenkins we use `BUILD {pipeline}`

Author: CICD SIG meeting notes:

Use same language for action as for other enums -> open-ended.
Eg. tool chains can use their own custom actions (`scan`, `test`, ...).

Author: I updated the language to be open-ended for `{action}` in 97b023fa9d79fd79e1b61d6ed1c3f381b3f7c388.

Author: ### Discussed in SemConv SIG 2025-03-28

When something is unbonded then it is high-cardinality. Ie if it has the potential to be infinite / limitless.
An example of unboundedness and thus high cardinality would be user-provided content like the URL path.

Having a lot of combination alone is not high cardinality. It's the fact that they are unbounded that that would be high cardinality. But even if you have, eg. 300000, but if it's constantly that number, they don't go over, then it might be okay.

Another rule of thumb: if it's low-cardinality enough to use as a metric attribute, then it's good enough to use as a span name.

---

All discussion points in this conversation look resolved to me.
Feel free to reopen if I missed something.

If there is no (low-cardinality) `{pipeline}` available, the span name SHOULD be `{action}`.

The `{action}` SHOULD be one of the following values: `BUILD`, `RUN`, `SYNC`.

The `{pipeline}` SHOULD be the [`cicd.pipeline.name`](/docs/attributes-registry/cicd.md).

<!-- semconv span.cicd.pipeline.run.server -->
<!-- NOTE: THIS TEXT IS AUTOGENERATED. DO NOT EDIT BY HAND. -->
<!-- see templates/registry/markdown/snippet.md.j2 -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<!-- markdownlint-capture -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable -->

| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | [Requirement Level](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/general/attribute-requirement-level/) | Stability |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| [`cicd.pipeline.result`](/docs/attributes-registry/cicd.md) | string | The result of a pipeline run. | `success`; `failure`; `timeout`; `skipped` | `Required` | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |

---

`cicd.pipeline.result` has the following list of well-known values. If one of them applies, then the respective value MUST be used; otherwise, a custom value MAY be used.

| Value  | Description | Stability |
|---|---|---|

> | `cancellation` | The pipeline run was cancelled, eg. by a user manually cancelling the pipeline run. | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |

Reviewer 4: Something that we experienced in the GitHub receiver for skip & cancelled pipelines is crazy durations on the spans set improperly. This is something messed up on the event side, but it makes me wonder if we should provide guidance around cancelled, skipped, and timedout pipeline span durations, eg.

cancelled pipelines should have a duration of cancelled at - started at when available, otherwise a default value of 0 should be used for the duration.

skipped pipelines should have a duration of 0 when emitted as a span.

timed out should be the same as cancelled.

Reviewer 4: This has been addressed. It was actually a ME problem (i wasn't setting an end span time in steps 🤦🏼  and that didn't get caught). 

However, I have added dedicated queue spans to jobs: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/pull/39511

This has added an attribute `cicd.pipeline.run.queue.duration` (which is basically a metric). 

We also did some queue span modeling, where the `run, queue, etc` prefix's come into a little more. I'm glad they're not mandatory though, as it's not possible to tell what is really a build (it's CI, but not necessarily a build, could be a lint, a test, a format, etc).

Author: I didn't get the point on what should be changed in this PR.

> This has been addressed.

I will mark this conversation as resolved.
Please clarify if changes related this discussion should be made.

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: Spans
--->

# Semantic conventions for CICD spans

**Status**: [Development][DocumentStatus]

<!-- toc -->

- [CICD Spans](#cicd-spans)
  - [Pipeline run](#pipeline-run)
  - [Pipeline task run](#pipeline-task-run)

<!-- tocstop -->

## CICD Spans

The conventions described in this section are specific to Continuous Integration / Continuous Deployment (CICD) systems.

Any resources of the [CICD and VCS resource conventions][cicdres] that apply SHOULD be used.

[cicdres]: /docs/resource/cicd.md (CICD and VCS resource conventions)

### Pipeline run

For all pipeline runs, a span with kind `SERVER` SHOULD be created corresponding to the execution of the pipeline run.

The span name MUST follow the overall [guidelines for span names](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/v1.43.0/specification/trace/api.md#span).

The span name SHOULD be `{action} {pipeline}` if there is a (low-cardinality) `pipeline` available.
If there is no (low-cardinality) `{pipeline}` available, the span name SHOULD be `{action}`.

> The `{action}` SHOULD be one of the following values: `BUILD`, `RUN`, `SYNC`. If none of these values applies a custom value MAY be used.

Reviewer 6: any reason for ALLCAPS? Also, would we have action appearing on metrics in some shape?  We probably want a dedicated attribute for it.

Author: I used ALLCAPS because I based this on the the http semconv which uses the http method (ie `GET`, `POST`, ...) and because Jenkins already uses `BUILD` in its pipeline run span name.

I think it makes sense to use ALLCAPS because it clearly distinguishes the action from the pipeline name.

I will make it an enum attribute, since it also makes it easier to have consistent language for the listed values and add additional ones in the future.
I don't think we will have this attribute on metrics.

Author: Made `{action}` an attribute: 3cefced99c742652925188a3acbf1bfea858297f

> The span name SHOULD be `{action} {pipeline}` if there is a (low-cardinality) `pipeline` available.
> If there is no (low-cardinality) `{pipeline}` available, the span name SHOULD be `{action}`.
> 
> The `{action}` SHOULD be one of the following values: `BUILD`, `RUN`, `SYNC`. If none of these values applies a custom value MAY be used.
> 
> The `{pipeline}` SHOULD be the [`cicd.pipeline.name`](/docs/attributes-registry/cicd.md).

Reviewer 6: nit: do you need a placeholder for `{pipeline}` given it's always `cicd.pipeline.name` ?

```suggestion
The span name SHOULD be `{action} {cicd.pipeline.name}` if there is a (low-cardinality) pipeline name available.
If pipeline name is not available or is likely to have high cardinality, the span name SHOULD be `{action}`.

The `{action}` SHOULD be one of the following values: `BUILD`, `RUN`, `SYNC`. If none of these values applies a custom value MAY be used.
```

Author: I made it similar to the http semconv where such placeholders are used.

Since we refer to several times (`if ... then ...`) it's more readable to use this placeholder instead of writing out the full attribute name.

Author: I improved the note like this in a8d7dea51d776dab86d45b042cbc82c5bb693dc3.

| `failure` | The pipeline run did not finish successfully, eg. due to a compile error or a failing test. Such failures are usually detected by non-zero exit codes of the tools executed in the pipeline run. | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |
| `skip` | The pipeline run was skipped, eg. due to a precondition not being met. | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |
| `success` | The pipeline run finished successfully. | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |
| `timeout` | A timeout caused the pipeline run to be interrupted. | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |

<!-- markdownlint-restore -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- END AUTOGENERATED TEXT -->
<!-- endsemconv -->

### Pipeline task run

<!-- semconv span.cicd.pipeline.task.server -->
<!-- NOTE: THIS TEXT IS AUTOGENERATED. DO NOT EDIT BY HAND. -->
<!-- see templates/registry/markdown/snippet.md.j2 -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<!-- markdownlint-capture -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable -->

**Status:** ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue)

Semantic Convention for tasks in a pipeline run

> **Span kind** SHOULD be `SERVER`.

Reviewer 5: In Jenkins, build steps, which seem to map to OTel tasks, use `SpanKind=Internal`. Setting them as `SpanKind=Server` could look weird in the trace view and would require to have a `SpanKind=client to trigger those tasks.`

Author: Note: if a pipeline span is of kind server and is triggered by another pipeline, then a server span could be a child span of an internal span.

Author: I changed span kind to INTERNAL for tasks in 9a0eaabb6f1b5a4ee24c1a5fd750fb124daf184f.

Considering https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#span-kind for the span kind of pipeline runs I'm not sure any fit perfectly. I'm tending towards `CONSUMER` due to the potential asynchronous processing of jobs however `SERVER` could also apply for jobs that are triggered and executed synchronously by other pipelines.
To be discussed in SemConv SIG...

Author: ### Discussed in SemConv SIG 2025-04-28

The span kind is used for

* displaying the span differently in observability backends
* [service graph connector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/connector/servicegraphconnector/README.md) for emitting metrics representing the service graph based on client/server and producer/consumer span pairs
* critical path analysis
  * to determine whether synchronous client/server calls are on the critical path, while asynchronous producer/consumer calls might be off the critical path
  * for cicd it might be more appropriate to consider every job even if triggered asynchronously because the job might only be done when every triggered pipeline is done (ie by using client/server span kind)

The client/server for synchronous and producer/consumer for asynchronous spans terminology does not work well for CICD because some pipeline runs might be triggered synchronously while others might be triggered by an event and execution might be asynchronous.

We should consistently use either Client/Server or Producer/Consumer span pairs.
Or stay with internal if we don't want to make any assumptions.

After some discussion the conclusion was to stay with server spans for pipeline runs for now.

Author: Regarding the inconsistency: the step triggering the child pipeline should be of span kind client, then it's fine.
It's possible for the client span to be much shorter in the case of asynchronous triggering of the child pipeline or for the client span to be larger than the child pipeline run span in case of synchronous execution of the child pipeline.
